LJMS — development notes
========================

The README is the pitch and the user manual. This file is the details: how it
is put together, what must not be broken, how to port it, and what is missing.


THE FILES
---------

src/org/ljms/
  Queue.java        The four state names. Nothing else — no transition table,
                    because doc/Queue_States.txt is the spec and the SQL is the
                    implementation, and a third copy would only be something
                    for those two to drift from.
  Task.java         One row. Public fields, no accessors: it is a record you
                    read, not an object with behaviour.
  Connections.java  The one thing you supply. A single method, so anything
                    (pool, JNDI, DriverManager) adapts in a lambda.
  Dialect.java      The whole portability surface: two SQL expressions.
  QueueDAO.java     All the SQL. Instance methods, no static state anywhere.
  Processor.java    The loop, with work() in the middle. THIS is the file you
                    edit.

test/org/ljms/
  StateMachineTest  The prover. Parses doc/Queue_States.txt and checks the
                    graph. No database. 19 ms.
  QueueTests        Behaviour, including the race. Needs a scratch database;
                    creates and drops its own table.
  Bench             Throughput measurement, so the README's numbers can be
                    reproduced rather than believed.

sql/                One schema per database. They differ only in types.
doc/Queue_States.txt  The specification. Not a description of the code.


INVARIANTS — do not break these
-------------------------------

1. THE CAS PREDICATE. QueueDAO.cas() ends with:

       WHERE id = ? AND status = ?          -- status = 'NEW'

   That predicate is the entire lock. It looks redundant because the row was
   just SELECTed, and it is not: under REPEATABLE READ the SELECT is a snapshot
   read and can return a row another worker has already taken and committed.
   The UPDATE re-checks with a current read, which is why the snapshot is
   harmless.

   Remove it and two workers get the same task. Silently. Only under load.
   Every test in QueueTests still passes except testRaceNoTaskTakenTwice —
   which is precisely why that test exists.

2. NOTHING IS HELD ACROSS YOUR CODE. No SELECT ... FOR UPDATE. No transaction
   spanning the read and the update. No transaction spanning work(). No table
   locks, no synchronized. The claim and each outcome are single predicated
   UPDATEs by primary key under autocommit; the two recovery sweeps are
   set-based. The database still takes a row lock inside each statement - two
   workers CAS-ing the same row do serialize for that instant - but no lock is
   held while your code runs.

   Autocommit is not assumed, it is checked: QueueDAO.open() refuses a
   connection that does not have it. Handed one from a pool configured
   autoCommit=false, nothing would ever commit - close() would roll back the
   claim and the outcome, the row would stay NEW, and every worker would run
   the same task forever, reporting only a "lease was already lost" warning
   each cycle. Silent and catastrophic; cheaper to refuse.

   This is what makes worker count scale: contention costs wasted attempts,
   never blocked waiters, so it degrades linearly instead of collapsing. The
   moment someone wraps the loop in a transaction "for safety", the queue
   acquires a convoy failure mode that testing will not show.

3. OWNERSHIP ON EVERY OUTCOME. done(), error() and extendLease() all carry
   "AND owner = ? AND status = 'IN_PROCESS'" and return the affected-row count.
   0 means the lease was lost — another worker owns the task now — and the
   caller must not treat it as success. Processor logs a warning; a task doing
   anything irreversible should call extendLease() first and stop if it fails.

4. THE DATABASE COMPUTES "NOW". Never the worker. Lease expiry compares
   lease_until against database time, so a lease written from a worker's own
   clock expires early or late by whatever the host clocks disagree by. That is
   why Dialect.nowPlusSeconds() exists instead of a bound timestamp.

5. process() CATCHES Throwable, NOT Exception, AND PARKS BEFORE RETHROWING.
   An Error out of work() - OutOfMemory, StackOverflow, NoClassDefFound, all
   reachable when you drop your own code in - would otherwise leave the row
   IN_PROCESS holding a live lease. After expiry it returns to NEW keeping its
   id, becomes the head again, and kills the next worker that takes it: one
   poison task stops the whole queue and every worker in turn, with cron
   restarting them into it. Park the row, then rethrow, so the worker dies and
   nothing else dies on the same task.
   Covered by testProcessorParksATaskThatThrowsAnError.

6. THE SHUTDOWN HOOK JOINS THE WORKER THREAD. A JVM runs its hooks and halts as
   soon as they return; it does not wait for other threads. A hook that only
   set the flag would let SIGTERM destroy the worker mid-work(), stranding the
   row for a full lease on an ordinary deliberate stop. main() joins, bounded
   by shutdownWaitMs, and queue.sh waits longer than that.

7. THE ROW-LIMIT CLAUSE IS NOT AN OPTIMISATION. head() ends with
   Dialect.firstRowOnly(). Without it, MySQL plans for the whole result set:
   it walks the primary key in id order to avoid a sort, filters on status as
   it goes, and does not use ix_queue_take at all — hundreds of rows examined
   to return one. Reading only the first row of the cursor does not help,
   because the plan is already chosen. Verify with EXPLAIN after any change to
   that query. You want the plan on ix_queue_take - MySQL reports type=range
   here, because of the not_before OR-condition - and NOT type=index on
   PRIMARY, which is what the missing limit produced.


PORTING TO ANOTHER DATABASE
---------------------------

Add one enum constant to Dialect with two expressions:

  nowPlusSeconds()  "now + N seconds", N bound as a parameter
  firstRowOnly()    the clause that keeps a sorted query to its first row

Then a schema in sql/, differing from mysql.sql only in column types and how
the primary key auto-increments.

Everything else is plain SQL: SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT, CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
COUNT. The standard leaves date arithmetic and row limiting to vendors, and
nothing else that LJMS uses.

Oracle needs one further change, noted in sql/oracle.sql: its JDBC driver wants
the generated-key column named, so QueueDAO.put()'s

    con.prepareStatement(q, Statement.RETURN_GENERATED_KEYS)

becomes

    con.prepareStatement(q, new String[] { "id" })

Status today: MySQL is the only dialect exercised by tests. PostgreSQL, Oracle
and SQL Server are transcribed from their documentation and have not been run.
If you run one, please say so.


RUNNING THINGS
--------------

  ant           compile (JDK only, no dependencies)
  ant prove     the state machine. No database, 19 ms. Run this on every change
                to doc/Queue_States.txt or Queue.java.
  ant test      behaviour + race. Set the DB constants at the top of
                QueueTests.java first — a SCRATCH database, it drops the table
                on every test method.
  ant bench     throughput. Same, in Bench.java. Note what it measures: the
                queue's overhead with no work in between. In the workloads this
                is built for — tasks of seconds to minutes — that overhead is a
                rounding error and the database sits idle. The number is useful
                for one question only: are your tasks shorter than ~2 ms, in
                which case you have outgrown this design.

There is no CI configuration here on purpose: the tests need a database, and
which database is your decision.

Changing the state machine: edit doc/Queue_States.txt FIRST, run "ant prove",
then make the SQL match. The doc is the spec; the code follows it. A state
added to the code and not the doc is caught by
StateMachineTest.testCodeAndSpecUseTheSameNames.


DESIGN DECISIONS, AND WHY
-------------------------

No automatic retries. A failed task goes to ERROR and stays there — one
failure, one log line, one row. A retry loop multiplies a single problem
across the log and hides how many distinct problems there are. Restarting the
worker is the retry: startup moves that worker's ERROR rows back to NEW, on the
assumption a person restarted it because they fixed the cause. Scoped by
owner_node, so restarting one worker does not replay another's failures.

Recovery by lease, not by owner. The obvious design keys recovery to the worker
that died: "on startup, reset my own in-flight rows". It has three problems the
lease does not. Work is stranded if that host never returns under the same name.
Two workers sharing a node id steal each other's live rows. And when the
DATABASE is what failed, a worker cannot write "put me back" anywhere — it has
nothing to write to. A lease expires without anyone's help.

At-least-once, said out loud. A worker that is slow rather than dead can lose
its lease and have its task run twice. Nothing with a network in it can
honestly promise exactly-once. Make tasks idempotent, or fence them with
extendLease().

States are names, not codes. The same symbol in the spec, the constant, the SQL
literal and the table, so "SELECT status, COUNT(*) GROUP BY status" answers the
question without the source. Codes need two mappings that can drift. The direct
ancestor of this queue used numeric codes and its recovery swept a hand-written
list — ('90','02','81','82','86','19') — that silently stopped covering every
in-flight state once new ones were added. Nobody reviewing that line could see
what was missing.

One task at a time per worker. Keeps the machine four states rather than a
concurrency model. For more parallelism, start more workers: they coordinate
through the table and hold nothing.

Configuration as constants in the file you already edit. No properties file, no
config class. Every project already has a way of holding credentials, and a
template that insists on its own leaves you a layer to remove.

The lease sweep runs on a timer, not per cycle. A lease is measured in minutes,
so sweeping on every task would add an UPDATE to every task in order to notice
nothing. Half a lease is timely enough and rare enough to disappear against
real work.

take() retries a lost race internally, so that a busy queue does not routinely
look empty to the caller and get slept on for a whole polling interval. This
reduces the probability; it does not establish an invariant. null means
"nothing due, OR every attempt lost a race", and the caller cannot tell which.
Each attempt re-reads the head, so losing all of them means being beaten on
TAKE_ATTEMPTS successive and different rows - rare, not impossible.

requeueErrors() also clears not_before. A task deliberately scheduled for 2am
that failed will, after a worker restart, run immediately rather than waiting
for the next 2am. Deliberate - the schedule has usually passed by then - but
worth knowing.

The node id is a diagnostics label for claiming and recovery, where the lease
carries the correctness. It is NOT merely a label for requeueErrors(), which
is scoped by owner_node and is the only automatic path out of ERROR. Where the
node id changes between runs - a container whose hostname is its id, or an
operator adding LJMS_NODE to a worker that had defaulted to the hostname -
that worker's ERROR rows have no automatic path back, and "restart is the
retry" never fires for them. Use a stable node id, or requeueAllErrors().


KNOWN GAPS
----------

- Only MySQL is tested. See PORTING above.
- No priority. Strictly first-in-first-out by id. A priority column plus one
  more ORDER BY term would do it; not added on speculation.
- No fairness between submitters. With many independent users, one who queues
  fifty tasks blocks the person who queues one behind all fifty. The fix is an
  extra ordering term (fewest currently-running first), not a new mechanism —
  but it is a policy decision, so it is not baked in.
- N workers all read the same head row, so contention is O(N) wasted attempts.
  Fine at the scale this is for. If it ever matters, read the top K rows and
  try them in order — still no locks.
- Nothing prunes DONE rows. Add a delete-older-than job if the table grows.
- No metrics or health endpoint. "SELECT status, COUNT(*) FROM QUEUE GROUP BY
  status" is the monitoring interface, and that is deliberate.
